---
layout: post
title: px, em and rem
tags:
- CSS
- Frontend
---

In HTML/CSS, when setting `font-size`, we have several options to specify unit. We will inspect some standard units.

# Fixed units

## px

`px` is pixel - the smallest unit in your screen resolution. Example:
```
font-size: 16px
```

- Fixed unit: 16px is 16 pixels in the screen.
- Pixel-perfect: no rounding, no anti-aliasing.

## pt

`pt` is point - the smallest unit in your print media (paper...)  
`pt` is more about physical size. e.g. your printer has resolution 72dpi, means 72 dots per inch.

Example:
```
font-size: 16pt
```

- Fixed unit: just like pixel.

# Relative units

## %

`%` is relative unit compared to current parent size.

Example this page:
```
#parent {
  font-size: 16px
}

#child {
  font-size: 50%
}


<div id='parent'>
  <p id='child'>Hello</p>
</div>
```

Then the child's `font-size` would be 50% of 16px is 8px

- Relative unit: scalable to parent size.

## em

Similar to `%`, but in decimal form.

Example:
```
100% = 1em
50%  = 0.5em
150% = 1.5em
```

- Relative unit: scalable to parent size.

## rem

`rem` is root `em`. It's also relative unit, but **relative to the root**, not to its direct parent.

Example this page:
```
html {
  font-size: 10px
}

#parent {
  font-size: 16px
}

#child {
  font-size: 1rem
}


<div id='parent'>
  <p id='child'>Hello</p>
</div>
```

The root (`html`) has size `10px`.  
The `parent` has size `16px`.  
The `child` has size `1rem`.

So `1rem` means 100% of root's size: 100% x 10px = 10px.  
`child` size is 10px.

# Choosing unit

## Fixed units

Pros:

- Pixel perfect
- Straight forward

Cons:

- Manually configure for difference screen resolution.
- Nightmare when refactoring size: You have to resize all components manually.

## Relative units

Pros:

- Responsiveness to difference screen size.
- Easier when refactoring size

Cons:

- Not pixel perfect

### Benefits of `em` and `%`

- It's relative to direct parent unit
- Complicated when calculate size for nested levels, something like 50% of 80% of 100%

### Benefits of `rem`

- It's relative to single root component
- Easier when sizing deep nested components as it just refers to single root size

