---
layout: post
title: Cross-site request forgery vs Cross-site scripting
tags:
- Security
---

Both XSS and CSRF are client-side attacks.

## Cross-site scripting

Let's say the user is currently opening a browser tab in: mail.com

The browser stores user data specific to that website, e.g. cookie, localstorage...  
In current tab, any js script can access those data.

Attacker tricks user to execute a script, that script will capture user data, and send to
attacker site -> so "cross-site"

There is 2 important parts:

- Attacker tricks user to execute a malicious script
  - By tricking user click to a url (either in chat, or email...)
  - The url could be like: `mail.com/search?q="><script>...malicious code...</script>`
- The script code can capture user data, and send to attacker site
  - The script is excuted in current browser context (in domain `mail.com`). So it can access
  cookie or localstorage of that website.
  - With captured data, the script can http post them to attacker website.

### Solution

Just escape the user input (url, form submit url...). Any HTML script tag will become plain text,
so it can't be executed by browser.

## Cross-site request forgery

"Request forgery" means copying/faking a request for malicious purpose.

Let's say user is currently logged in to `mail.com`.  
A request to change password is like: `mail.com/change-password?new=abc`

Here, the attacker forges a request to change password, and tricks user to send it:

- Forge a request to change password to `xyz`
  - Just make an url: `mail.com/change-password?new=xyz`
- Tricks user to click on that url

This is naive attack, only possible for bad designed API, and HTTP Get only.

Let's consider a HTTP post example. Here is `mail.com` form to change password:

```html
<form method='POST' action='/change-password'>
  <input type='text' name='new_password'/>
  <input type='submit'/>
</form>
```

The attacker create a website: `attacker.com`, has content:

```html
<form name='fake' method='POST' action='http://mail.com/change-password'>
  <input type='text' name='new_password' value='xyz'/>
  <input type='submit'/>
</form>

<script>
  document.onload = () => document.forms['fake'].submit()
</script>
```

Then, attacker tricks user to go to `attacker.com`.  
When page is loaded, the script kicks in, the form is submitted to `mail.com` with new password.

Of course it is also naive implmentation. But it is possible.

### Solution

For HTTP Post with form rendered by server-side:

- Whenever server renders a form, add anti-CSRF token field to form.
- The token is similar to session id, randomized for each form rendering request, .
- When form is submitted, the token go along with post request
- Server checks the CSRF token to match with saved token in server.

Because the token changes in every request, the attacker can't know and can't forge a valid request.
